>> NARRATOR: Tonight on
Frontline, an exclusive
investigation.
In the chaotic days after
Hurricane Katrina...
>> People were shot and killed
by the New Orleans Police
Department.
>> NARRATOR: ...eleven civilians
were shot by New Orleans police
officers...
>> Looting and other lawlessness
will not be tolerated.
>> NARRATOR: ...as rumors
circulated about a declaration
of martial law.
>> I've already called for
martial law in the city of New
Orleans.
>> I heard rumors that martial
law was in place, and then I
heard rumors that no, it was
not.
>> I never declared martial law.
>> NARRATOR: Did the police
believe they could suspend their
own rules?
>> Does he expect us to rank and
file, go through the streets,
you know, shooting looters?
>> NARRATOR: New evidence shows
that an order was given
authorizing officers to shoot
looters.
>> One of the most troubled
police departments in the
history of North America.
The NOPD reverts back to what
the existing culture has always
been.
>> That's the guy?
>> That's the one that beat me.
>> NARRATOR: Tonight, the story
of one of those killings.
>> What happened here wound up
setting this chain of events in
motion that has turned the New
Orleans Police Department upside
down.
>> NARRATOR: And questions about
a cover up.
>> Bodies don't just burn up
like that.
>> The way it was destroyed was
telling a story.
This was a premeditated
homicide.
>> NARRATOR: ProPublica reporter
A.C. Thompson, the Times-
Picayune, and Frontline
investigate: "Law and Disorder
in New Orleans."
>> NARRATOR: These are the
pictures we all remember.
The storm of a century.
The flooding that submerged a
city.
The dispossessed.
And the chaos.
>> Hey!
Stop!
Drop here!
>> Is it running right now?
>> Yeah, it's running.
>> NARRATOR: But there were some
images that few people saw.
This video was taken by this
man, Istvan Balogh, a former law
enforcement officer who had come
from out of state to assist
after the storm.
>> I mean, can you believe this?
This is, uh, the ninth of
September.
>> We were on a routine foot
patrol.
I'm looking down towards the
riverbank.
Just to see if I see anything
unusual.
And I observed a white vehicle.
We found this completely burnt
out vehicle.
I yelled up to my partner, I go,
"You won't believe what's in
here.
There's a dead body.
There's a... looks like a femur
right here.
I observed the skull.
And from here you can... there's
a skull.
I observed what looked like a
bullet wound.
Looks like it was shot from the
side.
There's no question in my mind.
This is a pre-meditated
homicide.
Absolutely amazing.
This body is disintegrated.
I mean, that was a hot fire.
This is the whole body right
here.
The magnitude of the way it was
destroyed.
It was telling a story-- I don't
want no one ever to find out
what I did.
>> NARRATOR: It was two years
after Balogh's discovery when a
reporter first came across the
story of the burnt remains.
ProPublica's A.C. Thompson, then
a freelance crime reporter, had
come to New Orleans to
investigate suspicious deaths in
the wake of Katrina.
With the support of the Nation
Institute, he'd sued to see the
public records.
>> I'd gotten a hold of over 800
autopsies of people who had died
in the days after the storm.
Most Katrina victims had
drowned, but one autopsy report
described a badly burned body.
And there was something else
that I found odd: there was no
cause of death.
The line where homicide or
accident could have been written
was blank.
The other information the
autopsy told me was that the
remains belonged to a 31 year-
old-man named Henry Glover.
I found out that Glover had
lived in the Algiers
neighborhood of New Orleans on
the west bank of the
Mississippi.
He had stayed in the city
through Katrina along with his
mother, brother and sister.
The last time his sister saw
Henry was September 2, four days
after the storm.
>> September 2, we was at home.
My brother and another friend
said that they was going out to
get some help and, you know, get
some water and some food and
stuff.
And... and he never made it
back.
>> Henry had come here to this
strip mall with his friend,
Bernard.
His brother, Edward, was nearby
at his own home that morning.
>> I was home feeding my family
and I can hear somebody
hollering from a distance.
My nickname is Dirty Red.
"Dirty, Dirty.
Somebody shot your brother."
I said, "Hold up.
Hold up.
You sure it's Henry?"
He said, "Yeah."
So he run... I run out the house
to where he was at.
>> Both Edward and Patrice ran
to find Henry here about 50
yards down the street from the
strip mall; he was bleeding from
the chest.
>> I saw my brother laying down
there and he was on his stomach.
I said, "Brother, hold on.
I'll get you some help."
>> That's when Edward flagged
down a passing car.
The stranger slowed, then
stopped.
His name is Will Tanner.
>> Henry Glover was in the
middle of the street and his
brother Edward was standing over
him and he's talking about how
he needed medical attention for
his brother.
So I got out the car, touched
his neck and see he still had a
pulse.
>> Tanner reaching down feeling
saying, "He have a pulse, he
have a pulse."
So I grabbed him and we fell
back into the car like this.
>> My mission is to get him to
the hospital or somebody who can
help him.
>> But Will Tanner thought the
hospital was too far.
He didn't think Glover would
make it.
Instead, Tanner drove a mile to
Habans Elementary School.
>> I knew at Habans School, they
have medical attention.
Police was camped out there.
>> In the days after Katrina,
the NOPD SWAT team had turned
this school into an armed
encampment.
>> Can I have everybody's
attention?
I'm going to go ahead and do the
mission briefing for the night.
>> These scenes were filmed for
a Frontline program called "The
Storm."
>> For tonight, our mission is
to proactively patrol the Fourth
district.
>> It's here that members of
this unit would gather for their
daily orders, often assigned to
go on looter patrol.
>> Our purpose for this patrol
tonight is going to be to deter
crime and looting patrol, all
right.
Anything out of the ordinary, go
ahead and challenge it.
>> When we got there, I thought
that they was going to help us.
But the first thing they did was
put us in handcuffs.
And I'm like, "Why?
We're coming for help."
So I made the statement because
you all... I said, "You all not
helping my brother."
Whoever killed him, I'm gonna
kill them," out of anger, you
know, for my brother.
I'm seeing my brother in that,
you know, that way.
So that's what I said and that's
when the beating came.
Man, they beat me, they beat me.
I ain't never been beat like
that in my life.
When he first hit me, I faked
like I was knocked out.
So he said, "Get up.
Get up, you piece of shit."
So he grabbed me right here and
he... his fingers almost
touched.
I liked to blacked out and he
let me go just in time.
>> They hit me.
Kicked me in the ribs twice.
Hit me with an M-16 rifle upside
my face.
And Henry Glover is still in the
car bleeding.
And no one didn't check on him
at all.
That was the cruelest thing a
person can do to a man-- let him
bleed to death in the car like
that.
And show no, you know, no
reaction to try to help him.
>> They let him sit in that car
too long.
The last time I saw my brother
is when they took me out of that
car and put them handcuffs
behind me.
That's the last time I saw him.
>> Edward says he and Will
Tanner were still in handcuffs
when one of the police officers
drove off in Tanner's car.
With Henry Glover still in the
backseat.
It's been five years since Henry
Glover died.
Edward is still haunted by the
experience.
>> I tried to figure it out.
I used to come out here and just
sit and try to redo the whole
thing, and I just can't... I
just can't figure it out.
I really can't.
>> I wasn't gonna do this, but
since we... that's the guy?
>> That's the one that beat me.
>> You sure?
>> I'm positive.
He beat me good.
I mean, I grew up in the
neighborhood project, I mean,
fighting three, four times a
day.
But I never got beat how this
man beat me with my hands behind
my back, kicking me in my face,
spitting in my face whenever he
felt like it.
>> It's been five years.
You're sure this is the dude?
>> I'm positive.
I'll put my life on the line
that's the one beat me.
I would never forget his face.
>> NARRATOR: The officer Edward
King fingered was Lieutenant
Dwayne Scheuermann, then second
in command of the NOPD SWAT
team.
Within the ranks of the police
department, Scheuermann's status
was almost legendary-- a cop's
cop; courageous and fearless.
That was certainly the
reputation he had earned in the
first days after Katrina.
Lt. Scheuermann was interviewed
by Frontline at Habans School.
>> When the storm hit early
Monday morning, we actually
watched it from the arena.
We're watching the pieces of the
dome's roof come off.
And we started getting reports
that there were already both
police officers and citizens in
trouble as far as high water is
concerned.
>> NARRATOR: At that time,
Scheuermann was considered a
hero for his part in rescuing
stranded flood victims.
>> Myself and my brother took
our personal fishing boats.
There was people in their
attics.
They had punched the windows out
of the attic.
And they were screaming to us to
come get them.
>> He was relentless.
Look at his face, his eyes, you
see the sheer determination but
you can also see the fatigue.
Police officers in the first
week, they were basically
working 24/7.
Just being in a constant sense
of survival.
It took a toll, it took a toll.
It was rough.
>> NARRATOR: Hurricane Katrina
had hit the New Orleans Police
Department hard.
>> Katrina hit on August 29,
sometime mid-day on August 30,
we lost complete communications.
>> NARRATOR: Warren Riley was
second in command of the NOPD at
the time of the storm.
>> We were unprepared.
The city was covered by water.
We had no power, no lights.
Our radio system went down, our
backup system failed.
And we lost complete command and
control of the police
department.
>> We were dealing with a police
force that was completely
inundated with lack of
resources.
And it was clear that we were
having some civil societal
breakdown.
>> Tension mixed with temptation
on Tuesday as those trapped in a
city of rising water took
survival into their own hands.
>> NARRATOR: Quickly news
reports were saturated with a
lasting image of Katrina-- the
looter.
>> Looting in New Orleans.
Shots have been fired.
>> Downtown New Orleans became a
looter's free-for-all.
>> They represent a frightening
breakdown of law and order.
>> NARRATOR: But early media
reports were exaggerated.
>> There was chaos on Canal
Street for a period of time.
That was a fact.
But rumors were all over the
place.
>> With gangs of men armed with
stolen weapons roaming the
streets and firing at police.
There may be shoot-outs soon
enough.
>> NARRATOR: Stories now known
to be untrue were told by the
highest-ranking NOPD officers.
>> The sniper started shooting
at my SWAT team off of fire
trucks.
Then they started shooting at me
in the helicopter.
>> NARRATOR: And then repeated
across the news.
>> How do you explain snipers
firing on a medevac helicopters
trying to get the sick to
safety?
>> Rumors were running amok.
And I shouldn't have, basically,
given it any credibility by
repeating what was told to me.
If I had to do it all over
again, I wouldn't.
>> We had a very tenuous
situation all throughout the
city.
And from that came rumors and
innuendo that unfortunately some
officials repeated as fact.
>> You getting ready to see
something that I'm not sure
you're ready to see.
There are people standing out
there.
Have been in that frickin'
Superdome for five days.
Watching dead bodies; watching
hooligans killing people; raping
people.
>> There's not one iota of
evidence to show that anyone was
killed or raped in the Dome.
But you have to realize we were
hearing these rumors and we were
believing these things as well,
initially.
>> NARRATOR: On August 30,
Deputy Chief Riley met with
Mayor Nagin and passed on
another unconfirmed report.
>> I heard an officer request on
the radio, he said, "I need more
ammo.
We need more ammo."
Imagine.
That's what you hear in the
movies, that's what you see in a
war movie.
You don't hear that in urban
policing where you're out of
ammo.
>> That's when the Mayor says
let's stop search and rescue and
bring our force back to
controlling the streets.
Let's stop the looting; let's
stop the lawlessness and let's
put our police officers on the
streets.
Riley says, "We will do that."
And the Mayor said, "Let's stop
this crap now."
>> I remember, we were down by
Harrah's Casino.
And Deputy Chief Riley walked up
in a pair of blue jeans, his
uniform shirt and a ball cap,
and really just starting giving
a pep speech, you know, kind of
a morale-booster, saying that we
were not going to allow the
looters to take the city, we
were going to more or less
protect the borders of it and
march through downtown and take
the city back.
>> Did you ever say, "It's time,
we got to take our city back?"
>> I may have said we need to
take control of the city, that
may have happened.
>> And do you think you ever,
did you ever say anything like
"Looters, it's time to, you
know, it's time to do things
like shoot to kill?"
>> No...
>> Or...
>> You're mixing me up with
someone else.
I didn't say anything like that.
>> Who said that?
>> I didn't say that.
I heard rumors that someone else
said that.
But I certainly didn't say that,
no.
>> It was a very broad order.
What exactly did he mean, you
know?
Does he expect us to rank and
file, go through the streets,
you know, shooting looters or
how do you take back a city?
>> Just sending out a general
order, general statement about
take back the city with no
specific guidelines is an
invitation to disaster.
>> NARRATOR: Sam Walker is a
professor of criminal justice
and an expert on the legal
standards for when police can
use their guns.
>> The standards on deadly force
are fairly clear.
An officer can use deadly force
where there is a threat to
someone's life, or that this
person is armed and fleeing and
likely to commit another armed
offense.
That's a very narrow range.
>> NARRATOR: But in post-Katrina
New Orleans, nothing was clear.
Could stealing food, water or a
TV now mean a death sentence?
>> A shoot to kill order, to
shoot looters, would violate the
long-established standards on
use of deadly force.
>> NARRATOR: Orders to the NOPD
rank and file became even more
uncertain when Mayor Nagin
called for martial law.
It was the day after the storm
and he had just been told by his
chief of police that a police
officer had been shot in the
head.
This story, we now know, was
true.
>> Our police, at that point,
were completely focused on
search and rescue.
And here they were being shot
at.
And it made the Mayor furious.
And that's when he said, we need
to declare martial law.
>> The city they nicknamed the
Big Easy, still a disaster zone,
under martial law.
>> Tonight, in a rare move.
Practically unheard of in the
United States-- martial law
declared.
>> Would you request martial
law?
>> I've already called for
martial law in the city of New
Orleans.
>> NARRATOR: In fact, martial
law was never declared in New
Orleans.
>> NARRATOR: Ray Nagin declined
to be interviewed for this
program, but his deputy chief of
police, Warren Riley, said there
was confusion.
>> I heard rumors that martial
law was in place, and then I
heard rumors that, no, it was
not given.
>> I never declared martial law.
I know that it's not legal to do
that.
But what we were doing was
strengthening the appearance of
a lawful environment.
That's when I called in members
of the Guard who knew policing,
and I asked them to come in and
to show force.
We needed to make a very
dramatic statement, to calm the
media down and to calm the
citizenry down.
There are hundreds of law
enforcement officers being
deployed into New Orleans today
to restore order.
Looting and other lawlessness
will not be tolerated.
I wanted it to be strong and I
wanted it to be clear.
These troops know how to shoot
and kill and they are more than
willing to do so, if necessary,
and I expect they will.
>> NARRATOR: The mixture of
rumors and official orders had
an impact at police stations
around the city.
Five current and former ranking
officers have told Frontline,
ProPublica, and the Times-
Picayune, on condition of
anonymity, that they believed
they had been given authority to
shoot looters.
They said they did not pass the
order on.
However at one station, a police
officer's home videotape
captured first district Captain
James Scott telling officers
quote, "We have authority, by
martial law, to shoot looters."
Captain Scott initially told us
he didn't recall the incident
and declined to comment.
Scott has since hired an
attorney who told Frontline
that the rest of the tape puts
the statement in context, but he
refused to show it to us.
Had the rules on the use of
deadly force changed?
Other officers said orders
spread from cop to cop.
"Do what you gotta do.
Anything goes.
Take the city back."
>> As I was reporting on Henry
Glover, I found evidence of
other troubling incidents
involving the police in the days
after the storm.
The first of them happened here
on this overpass on September 1.
Just like the Glover story, this
one involved the SWAT team that
was camped out at Habans School.
Captain Jeff Winn and his
lieutenant, Dwayne Scheuermann,
were told that someone had
hijacked a water truck.
The story they heard was that
thieves were robbing, raping and
killing people.
Winn and Scheuermann rolled out
through the flooded streets.
And near the Superdome, they
spotted three water trucks.
They said a man near one of the
trucks had a gun.
Both officers took aim.
These pictures show Dwayne
Scheuermann at the scene.
( gunshots )
They hit the man in the torso--
but he survived.
His name was Keenon McCann.
And when the cops apprehended
him there was no gun to be
found.
The police theorized he might
have thrown it away-- off the
overpass.
Keenon McCann was lucky that
day.
He survived getting shot.
He's since died, but his brother
and sister-in-law were with him
on the bridge.
They say he didn't have a gun.
That he was stranded there with
his family.
What do you think happened?
>> What I think happened, that I
think they just came out there
and got the wrong people, or the
wrong person.
Mistakenly shot Keenon for
nothing.
That's what happened.
If he had a gun, why did they
bring him in Baton Rouge to the
hospital?
Brought him there,
un-handcuffed, he stayed there
for a minute, and then they cut
him loose, and let him go free.
The system don't work like that.
>> NARRATOR: The local
prosecutor never brought any
charges against Keenon McCann.
McCann was the first of at least
10 questionable shootings of
civilians by police in the week
after Katrina.
>> They beat me, they beat me.
I ain't never got beat like that
in my life.
>> NARRATOR: It was the very
next day that Edward and Will
Tanner say they were beaten by
police as Henry Glover bled in
the back seat of Tanner's car.
>> And what was he wearing at
the time?
>> He had the tactical pants.
>> Like the dark army kind of
uniform?
>> The blue, like a bluish
black.
>> NARRATOR: Back across the
river that night, there was
another shooting-- this one at
the New Orleans Convention
Center.
Danny Brumfield was shot in the
back by an NOPD officer.
The next day, a 41-year-old
drifter named Matthew McDonald
was killed by the police at this
intersection near the French
Quarter-- also by a single
gunshot to the back.
And finally, there was the
incident at Danziger Bridge,
which has become the most well
known of the shootings by police
after Katrina.
At the time, the Danziger
incident seemed to be a victory
for the police in their fight
against lawlessness.
It was September 4, when word
went out over the radio that
officers were under fire near
the bridge.
>> The radio just came alive
with people screaming, gunshots
in the background.
( gunshots )
>> We could hear a running gun
battle.
We could hear officers calling
for assistance.
We could hear officers saying
perpetrator down.
( gunshots )
>> It sounded like World War
Three was going on.
>> NARRATOR: By the time gunfire
stopped, six people had been
shot by the police.
>> The general consensus was
good guys, one, bad guys, zero.
>> When we found situations
where the police actually won,
you did a little cha-ching
because finally they didn't get
us.
We got them.
If indeed people had been
shooting at police officers,
then so be it if our police
officers shot them to stop them.
Of course, that was not the case
we now know.
>> It would take years for the
truth to be revealed about what
actually happened on Danziger
Bridge.
But in 2008, I was still on the
hunt for what had happened to
Henry Glover.
His brother Edward had last seen
him bleeding in the back seat of
Will Tanner's car.
The car was then driven off by a
police officer and was followed
by another vehicle allegedly
driven by Dwayne Scheuermann.
Tanner's car ended up here, just
a mile away, on the levee.
>> Take a video of me next to
it.
>> One week later, Istvan, the
guy with video camera, found the
burned car and remains.
>> I'm looking back towards that
transformer.
It was about this distance.
>> At the time, he says no one
seemed to care.
Now you were talking to law
enforcement folks on a regular
basis.
Did you bring this up with them?
>> Oh, absolutely.
Told, you know, the federal
authorities, told the military,
told NOPD, told the state
police.
Everybody knew that there was a
body down there, but there
wasn't no concern.
>> The remains stayed on the
levee another week before
finally being taken to the
coroner.
>> What we got was a body bag
full of bones.
>> Frank Minyard is the coroner
for New Orleans.
>> Cause of death, we don't
know.
I would guess it would be fire.
But you know, what happened?
Was he shot?
Was he hit on the head?
Did he shoot himself?
Did he catch himself on fire?
All of those kind of things, we
can't say.
There's nothing on the body bag
that identifies where it came
from.
There's no tags saying how it
got there.
We never knew the body... that
those bones came out of a car.
>> But forensic pathologist
Kevin Whaley remembers it
differently.
Whaley came down from New York
to help with autopsies after
Katrina.
He examined Glover's remains.
>> We took the shoulder girdle
out.
>> He says Minyard's own people
told him where the remains had
come from.
>> I was told it was found in a
burnt out car, and this set of
remains was in it.
And for a forensic pathologist,
I mean, that should be enough.
If all you have is a burnt out
car and remains with this degree
of disruption and charring,
that's suspicious.
Typically, the car fires we see,
all the organs are fine, almost
pristine.
You can do a full autopsy just
like you would anybody else.
This state of all that being
gone-- well, that's just really
out of the ordinary.
That's like Roswell, New Mexico,
out of the ordinary kind of
stuff there.
>> There's a dead body...
>> Whaley had never seen the
video of Glover's remains until
I showed him.
It gave him new reason for
suspicion.
>> I mean, there's definitely a
skull here.
Most of the neck is there at the
base of the skull.
>> By the time the remains had
gotten to him, Glover's skull
was gone.
>> There's most of a skull
there.
>> We don't know why the skull
went missing, but it's possible
that somebody got rid of the
skull to make it harder to
identify this guy.
>> Sure, or if there's injuries
in the skull that you didn't
want someone to see.
I mean, there's... there'd be a
whole lot of reasons.
Or it could just have been
misplaced, but that would be...
that in and of itself is sort of
suspicious.
You don't just misplace a skull.
And from here, you... there's a
skull...
>> All that together is just
highly suspicious for foul play,
for a homicide.
>> But coroner Frank Minyard
never classified the death.
He left that line on Glover's
autopsy blank.
>> A forensic pathologist named
Kevin Whaley from Virginia...
>> Minyard spoke to Frontline
reporter Lowell Bergman.
>> He said, "My first reaction
was that it was a homicide.
When I heard he was found in a
burned-out car, I thought that
was a classic homicide scenario.
You kill someone and burn the
body to get rid of the
evidence."
And I think he said he found
metal fragments when they
X-rayed the bags.
>> They did have... one of the
bones did have some metal
fragments, which you... which
you will find when a body is
burned in a car.
You will find some metal
fragments, correct.
I really can't talk anymore
about this because it's a case
that's active now.
And as far as anything else that
we might have or bring up, we
have to save that for the proper
time.
So you understand, I cannot
comment on what he just said.
>> At the time, in 2005,
Minyard's blank line meant case
closed.
The NOPD told me they never did
their own investigation into the
remains, and knew nothing else
about Henry Glover.
But in my own investigation, I
got a break-- a source came to
me with information about what
had happened to Henry Glover.
And the source had photographs.
The pictures show the whole
crime scene, and clearly show
the skull that never made it to
the coroner.
And my source told me something
else-- the photos were taken by
the NOPD, by officers at the
Fourth District station.
It turns out that the spot on
the levee where the car and
Henry's body had been torched is
barely a block away from that
station.
Henry's mother Edna didn't know
that the burnt car was still
just a block away when she came
to this station trying to get
police attention.
It was two and a half months
after the car had been burned.
Edna Glover still didn't know
exactly what had happened to her
son, but she told the police an
alarming story-- how her son had
been shot; how her other son,
Edward, had taken Henry to a
police compound at Habans School
for help, and instead had been
beaten by police; and how police
officers had taken the vehicle
with her son in it.
The police recorded her story as
a missing persons report and
filed it away.
>> They told my mother that they
were going to get back with her.
They were going to come out to
her house and talk to her, but
no one did.
No one called us back.
We didn't get any answers.
>> Father, we come now, Lord,
asking you that you would keep
this sister, this mother, Lord.
>> It would be another eight
months before Henry's remains
were finally identified through
DNA evidence and returned to the
family for burial.
>> There's one has not come
home, nor is he above ground.
>> I didn't know that they burnt
him.
My mother told me this, like, a
day before the funeral.
So I'm thinking I'm going to
kiss him and say good-bye.
>> Thank you, Lord and Master,
for bringing that situation to
an end.
Amen.
>> NARRATOR: For the next year,
the trail on Henry Glover went
cold.
In the fall of 2009, Frontline
and ProPublica teamed up with
the New Orleans Times-Picayune
to expand the investigation.
Two crime reporters there had
been breaking stories about the
Danziger Bridge shootings, which
had attracted the attention of
federal investigators.
Four people wounded, two dead--
was it a justified shooting?
>> Officers say there was an
exchange of gunfire on the
bridge.
The surviving people say that
they never fired any guns or had
any guns.
>> NARRATOR: Publicly, the men
under investigation had the full
support of their fellow
officers.
>> A lot of police officers
think that these aren't fair
investigations.
If they did something that, in
retrospect, seems inappropriate,
they were just trying to deal
with... with the hand they'd
been dealt.
>> NARRATOR: Danziger was the
big story.
But the Times-Picayunereporters
had also been looking into the
Glover case.
They had a simple question: Who
shot Henry Glover?
>> There was all these different
stories running around, and when
I talked to Henry Glover's
former girlfriend-- who had
Henry Glover, Jr., who is now
13-- she heard a story about
another family member shooting
him.
I mean, these were all crazy
allegations.
>> I had my own theory about
what had happened that day at
the strip mall.
I thought maybe a storeowner had
shot him to protect his
property.
But really, there was only one
person who could tell me what
happened, Henry's friend Bernard
Calloway, who was with Henry
that day at the mall.
Bernard would never agree to go
on camera, but early in 2010, he
finally talked to me by phone.
What Bernard said was Henry was
stealing something.
Henry was picking up goods that
had been stolen from this
shopping center, and they were
in a piece of luggage right
here.
And that a relative wanted him
to pick up these stolen goods
that were, like, candles and
pots and pans.
And Bernard and Henry came up
here in a white pickup truck,
and they parked it right here.
They get out to pick up this
stolen stuff and Bernard says,
"I hear 'Leave now' and a shot."
He couldn't see the person's
face, but he decided that it was
a police officer that had done
the shooting.
By the guy's actions, the shot,
the "Leave now," and his voice,
he thought it was a police
officer.
He said, "I knew it was a cop.
It was right near the police
station."
It turned out that Bernard was
right about the police station.
Up here on the second floor of
the mall-- what's now a tattoo
parlor and hair salon-- was, in
fact, a police substation at the
time of Katrina.
You can still see the faded
police decals.
The NOPD denied any reports of a
police shooting that day.
But my colleagues at the Times-
Picayune found that wasn't
true.
The evidence?
A police report of the incident
that had been buried for more
than four years.
It said there had been a
shooting that day, and it
involved a 42-year-old rookie
cop named David Warren.
On September 2, 2005-- the day
Henry Glover was shot-- Warren
was on duty at the strip mall
police substation.
The report gave his version of
events.
He said in the police report, he
came out of this office because
he heard a ruckus.
He heard a truck being driven
really kind of fast and
erratically.
He thought these men in the
truck were menacing him.
He was scared for his life, so
he opened fire.
My sense would be that Officer
Warren is coming over here, he's
coming this a way, looking down
and firing.
He says he doesn't know if he
hit anybody, he doesn't know if
anybody was injured.
It's a short distance.
If you are from here to there, I
think it would be hard not to
know whether you hit the person
or not.
It's pretty clean line of sight
right down there.
Henry had been shot, Bernard
told me, right next to the
truck.
And where you think the truck
was?
>> No, the truck was... excuse
me, the truck was over here.
The truck was... the truck was
here.
>> Edward's memory of what he
saw that day made Warren's
account even more confounding.
>> The truck was here.
>> The truck was right here?
>> The truck was here, parked
this way.
>> So the truck was right here.
>> The truck was parked here,
this way.
>> So, if the truck is parked
right here, and the guy is up
there, you're probably going to
see if you shot someone who's
standing right here.
>> You could.
>> See, I thought he was further
out that way.
>> No, he was here.
>> After Henry Glover was shot,
he stumbled about 50 yards down
the street.
That's where Will Tanner picked
him up, and then raced to Habans
Elementary School where Tanner
thought they would give Glover
medical attention.
I mean, when you picked him up,
did you think he had a chance of
living?
>> Yeah, he had a chance.
He still was talking.
And, you know, he still was
breathing.
So I thought maybe I'll get him
some medical attention, he might
be able to, you know, point the
person out who shot him.
These guys, boys in blue, are
supposed to help out, you know.
All a sudden, I seen a different
boys in blue.
>> So, if you'd known he'd been
shot by a police officer, you
wouldn't have brought him here,
probably.
>> No, I wouldn't have brought
him here, because I knew if I'd
brought him here, I wouldn't
stand a snowball's chance if I
knew he got shot by a cop.
>> The men say they were
handcuffed and beaten until
finally a female officer
intervened.
>> A lady come out.
She recognized Tanner.
She said, "I know him.
I know him.
What did he do?"
He said, one of the guys said,
"Oh, those niggers over there
are looting."
I said, "Looting?"
>> They thought that we was
looters and everything like
that.
When they searched my car, they
didn't find nothing new or
nothing like that.
But they was curious.
>> NARRATOR: What do the police
at the elementary school say
happened there that day?
Because of the federal
investigation, they wouldn't
speak to us for this program.
The only account is this
unfinished police report that
Times-Picayune reporter Laura
Maggi uncovered.
In it, police officers say that,
when the car drove into the
school, it was being driven
erratically and being chased by
police cars.
It says the man in the backseat
was already dead, and that the
other men refused to cooperate
with police.
They say they handcuffed the
men, but say nothing of any
beating.
The account says nothing about
burning the car or the body, but
it does say they drove the car
to the levee behind the Fourth
District police station.
They say they were securing the
body until it could be brought
to a makeshift morgue for an
autopsy.
>> The question is, if they
indeed did want to secure the
body that why they didn't
subsequently come back and write
a report and say, "Hey, we have
this shot person and maybe this
person's a... a crime victim.
We should find something out
about that."
>> NARRATOR: It turns out that
the author of the unfinished
Glover report had also signed
off on the police account of the
incident at Danziger Bridge, a
report that federal prosecutors
now say was largely fabricated.
>> Today, six New Orleans police
officers...
>> NARRATOR: In July, six NOPD
officers were indicted in the
Danziger Bridge case.
>> ...resulting from the federal
criminal investigations...
>> NARRATOR: In its
investigation, the FBI
reconstructed what the police at
the scene say happened that day.
The incident began when a group
of NOPD officers commandeered a
Budget rental truck to respond
to a distress call on the
bridge.
They say they heard on the radio
that officers were under fire.
One officer says he fired
warning shots out of the truck's
window.
Almost immediately, the other
officers poured out of the
truck, guns firing.
But federal prosecutors now say
there's no evidence the police
were under threat.
In fact, the police were firing
on unarmed civilians, Katrina
survivors searching for food and
medicine.
NOPD officers killed two people
and wounded four that day.
Ronald Madison, a 40-year-old
mentally disabled man, was shot
in the back, and then repeatedly
kicked as he was dying.
Jose Holmes was 19 at the time.
He doesn't know how many times
he was shot.
>> I just felt pain rush to my
arm.
Horrible.
Like World War II or something.
And then, it was for a long
time, I thought it wasn't going
to stop.
I thought it was the end so, I
just... I didn't know what to
think.
>> NARRATOR: Jose was lucky to
survive.
His 17-year-old friend, James
Brisette, died next to him.
Despite the brutality, police
defenders say it was a confusing
time in post-Katrina New
Orleans.
>> People want to look at what
an officer did based on normal
times.
Believe me, you know, during the
Katrina days, we weren't living
in the real world; we were
living in a holocaust.
We were living in a situation
that no other police department
ever had to endure.
>> We do have to understand what
happened here, and we have to
understand the pressures that
were on this department.
We have to understand the chaos
that existed internally and
externally, and we have to
understand all the conditions
that led up to this.
>> NARRATOR: Mary Howell is a
long-time New Orleans civil
rights attorney.
She's representing Lance
Madison, who was among those on
the bridge that day.
>> What police always say is, in
times of crisis, that's when
your training's supposed to kick
in, that's when this stuff is
supposed to be so ingrained in
you that you don't even have to
think about it, because that's
your default.
So you have to ask why do some
people have that default and act
appropriately and conduct
themselves professionally, even
without, you know, all the
apparatus around them, and why
did some lose their bearings?
And then, that raises the
question-- well, were they
losing their bearings, or had
this been their default all
along?
>> FBI agents had kept a close
eye on Fifth District officer
Len Davis.
>> NARRATOR: The history of
scandal in the New Orleans
Police Department goes back many
decades before Katrina.
>> They'd hoped to have snared
as many as 25 bad cops.
They netted nine suspects.
>> NARRATOR: A noxious
combination of corruption and
brutality that peaked in the
1990s.
>> We had police officers doing
bank robberies.
We had police officers involved
in arson, rape, kidnapping.
We used to say that people in
New Orleans were more afraid of
the police than they were the
criminals, and it was hard to
tell the difference.
>> I know police officers that
killed people.
I know police officers that
robbed people, ripped off drug
dealers.
I mean, it goes on and on.
>> NARRATOR: Mike Thames was an
NOPD officer in the '80s and
'90s before being arrested
himself for bank robbery.
>> A couple of times, I was
investigated.
But 99% of the time, I was
told... they'll warn you, like,
"Hey, Mike, you're being watched
for this," or "Hey, Mike,
they're going to call you in for
this, so get your story
straight."
>> NARRATOR: The culture of
lawlessness ran so deep that
historic divisions of race
seemed forgotten.
It wasn't black or white; it was
blue.
>> Some black officers look at
themselves more as blue than
black.
You adopt the culture of a
police officer as opposed to
"I'm a black cop" or "I'm a
white cop."
"No, I'm just a cop."
>> NARRATOR: But in 1994, New
Orleans got a new police chief,
Richard Pennington, brought in
from Washington, D.C., with new
ideas.
>> Most citizens are afraid.
That's why they don't call us.
Because they feel if they call
us, we're not going to do
anything to protect them.
>> Pennington comes in as an
outsider.
Fired police officers,
instituted integrity checks.
He just professionalized the
police department.
He brings it into the 20th
century.
>> NARRATOR: The Pennington era
didn't last.
In 2002, Pennington ran for
mayor, without support of the
police, and lost to Ray Nagin.
>> Nagin gets in office and he
chooses to appoint a good street
cop, Eddie Compass, as chief of
police.
>> Chief Pennington did an
outstanding job as it relates to
getting the police department in
the right direction.
I tried to continue that in
vein.
>> And so the... the discipline,
the Internal Affairs reviews,
that kind of stuff that Chief
Pennington set up...
>> We kept those things in
place.
>> NARRATOR: But under Compass,
investigations of complaints
against officers dropped
dramatically.
>> The threat of officers losing
their jobs leaves with
Pennington.
The NOPD reverts back to what it
knows.
It reverts back to what's
comfortable, what's convenient,
and to what the existing culture
has always been.
>> Almost immediately, you saw,
discipline stopped,
accountability stopped.
By the time we came to Katrina,
this department was, I would
say, in as bad a shape as we had
been in 1994.
And that storm stripped bare any
pretense that there was any
structure, any accountability,
any of the... the skeleton that
you would expect of an
organization like a police
department.
It all vanished.
"The courts are gone, the jails
are gone.
It's up to us.
And we're going to, 'Do what we
have to do and move on'."
>> NARRATOR: According to
officers who have pled guilty in
the Danziger Bridge case, a
cover-up of the killings began
almost immediately.
>> A lieutenant told the
officers involved in the
shooting to get their stories
straight.
There were secret meetings held.
One man is accused of getting a
gun from his house and filing it
into the court record as being a
gun that was used by civilians
on the bridge that day.
>> NARRATOR: A court document
called a Bill of Information
says the planted gun was
referred to by the detective as
a "ham sandwich."
>> Every cop that I knew carried
a ham sandwich.
A ham sandwich is a... a clean
gun that they would take and put
it in like an old pair of jeans
or britches or whatever you want
to call it.
And they'd let it sit there and
get some lint on it.
Then after they let it sit in
there, then you put it in a
plastic bag.
I carried mine with me wherever
I went.
Some people don't carry it with
them.
>> So you'd have it under the
seat of your car or something?
>> No, I had a briefcase.
I carried it in my briefcase.
>> So you carried around a gun
to plant on suspects?
>> Yeah, of course.
>> Some former officers we've
talked to have said, "Hey, this
was an underground culture."
They would carry around
something they called a "ham
sandwich," and they would plant
that "ham sandwich" at the scene
of officer-involved shootings.
Did you ever hear anything about
that?
>> Nope.
That's not on my radar.
Nothing about that.
Like I said, that investigation
was done under Chief Riley's
watch.
>> I mean, over time... I mean,
this was handed down.
>> As I'm telling you, I mean,
you know, I don't really recall
ever having those type of
conversations.
I'm telling you straight up.
>> When was the first time you
ever heard the term "ham
sandwich?"
>> In that Bill of Information.
>> You never heard of a "ham
sandwich" before then?
>> Never heard.
Within NOPD, you have several
different cultures as well.
And that was a culture I was not
a part of.
I had never heard that before.
>> A short while ago, a federal
grand jury returned an 11-count
indictment charging five
individuals...
>> NARRATOR: Federal indictments
in the Henry Glover case were
handed up in June.
>> ... former NOPD officers,
three current NOPD officers
with...
>> NARRATOR: It had been over
two years since reporter A.C.
Thompson came across the story
of Henry Glover's burnt body.
At the end of 2008, he published
the first of many articles.
>> Your article that identified
the shooting death and the
burning of Henry Glover acted
as... as an incredible catalyst
and a lead for us in our
investigation.
The shooting and killing Henry
Glover...
>> NARRATOR: Five police
officers were charged with 11
federal civil rights violations,
each count telling a piece of
the story about Henry Glover's
demise.
Federal prosecutors say Officer
David Warren used an assault
rifle to shoot and kill Henry
Glover.
he charge is murder.
Warren refused to comment.
Prosecutors charged Dwayne
Scheuermann and another officer
with using unreasonable force in
the beating of Edward King and
Will Tanner.
Scheuermann, who refused to
comment on the Glover incident,
is also charged with setting
fire to Will Tanner's car with
Henry Glover's body in the back
seat.
And just as in Danziger, the
indictments allege a cover-up.
>> In two instances, we've seen
at least indicators of a cover-
up.
How far that goes, I honestly
don't know.
>> NARRATOR: The indictments
charge two officers from the
Fourth District station.
They say the men knew that
Warren had shot Glover;
they knew Glover had been taken
to the Habans School;
they knew Glover's body had been
burned on the levee.
Prosecutors said the police knew
all of this from the beginning;
they just conspired to keep it
hidden.
>> How did you feel when,
finally, somebody from law
enforcement came to you and
said, "We want to know what
happened that day?"
>> Ooh, man, that day, this lady
come knocking on the door, I
said, "Oh, Lord done answered my
prayer."
I said, "He done answered my
prayers."
And I said, "Thank you, Lord."
And like I told her, I said I
never thought they had people
out there who will go after
them.
But she told me she's going
to... she said, "I promise you,
you're going to get justice."
That's wrong what they did to my
brother.
That's wrong.
My mind is messed up.
Every time I pass by that
school, I get flashbacks.
Sometimes, I dream about it.
I was thinking, after a while,
it'd go away.
It's not going away.
I used to scare my wife waking
up on the side of her in deep
sweats.
I forgive that police officer.
I forgive him with all my heart,
because if I don't, God ain't
going to forgive me when I do
something wrong.
I forgive him.
And I'm trying to deal with this
every day.
It's hard, man.
Feel like something just is
gone, that I had in my heart is
gone.
I ain't going to get it.
I can't see him no more, can't
do the things we normally do,
you know.
I miss my brother.
I miss him.
>> There's more about this
ongoing investigation on our
website, or you can watch the
report again online.
( gunshots )
Get more details on the cases.
See a timeline of the troubled
history of the New Orleans
police force.
>> Within NOPD, you have several
different cultures, as well.
>> Explore our extended
interviews.
>> During the Katrina days, we
weren't living in the real
world.
>> Were they losing their
bearings, or had this been their
default all along?
And join the discussion at
pbs.org.
>> Frontline's "Law and
Disorder" is available on DVD.
To order, visit shopPBS.org or
call 1-800-PLAY-PBS.
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
access.wgbh.org
>> Frontline is made possible
by contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
Thank you.
With major funding from the
John D. and Catherine T.
MacArthur Foundation.
Committed to building a more
just, verdant and peaceful
world.
Additional funding is provided
by the Park Foundation.
And by theFrontlineJournalism
Fund.
With grants from the Hagler
family and Scott Nathan and
Laura DeBonis.
>> You're watching PBS.